= swf_fu --- History

== Version 1.4.0 - May 8, 2010

* Any option can be a block, in which case it is called (with the source swf passed as argument)

== Version 1.3.1 - February 5, 2010

* Improved compatibility with Rails 3.0: swf_tag now outputs html_safe content.

* Got rid of deprecation warning in Rails 2.2+ when using swf_tag in block form.

== Version 1.3.0 - June 20, 2009

* Updated to swf_object v2.2. Change should not be noticeable to users, except compatibility improvements and better auto install. Added the option +switch_off_auto_hide_show+.

== Version 1.2.0 - January 14, 2009

* flashvars[:id] will now default to the DOM id of the object. I didn't want to have any extra defaults than the very basic ones, but there is no easy way to get this from Flash (see http://www.actionscript.org/forums/showthread.php3?t=136044 ) and no easy way to specify that using +swf_default_options+.
* If flashvars is a string (e.g. "myVar=myValue") it will be parsed into a hash so that the behaviour for default values apply to strings or hashes. swf_default_options[:flashvars] can also be a string and will also be parsed before being merged.
* Small bug fix: the options passed as hashes (:flashvars, :parameters and :html_options) were changed if swf_default_options[:flashvars, ...] existed. They are now left unchanged.

== Version 1.1.0 - January 3, 2009

* Improved the way to specify alternate content

== Version 1.0.3 - January 3, 2009

* Improved javascript initialization

  :initialize => [1, 2, 3]  # produces in javascript: obj.initialize(1,2,3) instead of ([1,2,3])
  # no :initialize produces in javascript: obj.initialize() instead of (null)
  :initialize => nil        # stil produces obj.initialize(null)

== Version 1.0.2 - January 3, 2009

* Bug fix for flashvars in dynamic method

== Version 1.0.1 - January 2, 2009

* File reorganization
* Bug fix for default options

== Version 1.0 - X-mas, 2008

=== Initial release.
